# MIMIC-IV-AKI-Diagnosis
Diagnosing Acute Kidney Injury, and further classifying Acute Kidney Injury types, using the MIMIC IV open-source dataset and implementing an AKI diagnosis protocol established by KDIGO.

This project was completed under the direction of Dr. Ning Shang in the Kiryluk Lab of Columbia Medical School.

Research Abstract:

  Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) is a rapid occurrence of kidney deterioration within hours or days. The disease has various settings in which it occurs, including pre-renal, intra-renal, and post-renal causes, as well as variable rates of oliguria and disease reversibility. AKI often arises as a comorbidity in various common medical scenarios, such as from drug toxicity, hypotension, blood loss from sustaining trauma, severe burns, sepsis, or multiple myeloma. Beyond these various associated causes, AKI has both oliguric and non-oliguric courses, making consistent definitions related to urine output vital for accurately diagnosing all appropriate patients with Acute Kidney Injury. 
AKI patients’ kidneys experience a rapid reduction in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), meaning that less blood is filtered by the kidney glomerulus. Given the kidneys’ vital role in maintaining fluid homeostasis, this reduced kidney filtration and function can lead to a buildup of waste products like creatinine and urea in the blood and cause fluid imbalances. If left undiagnosed or untreated, AKI can have severe adverse outcomes, such as heart disease, chronic kidney disease, or kidney failure, all of which can be fatal. Especially within hospitalized patients, AKI is associated with very high morbidity and mortality.

  There are two specific subtypes of Acute Kidney Injury that this research is directed towards: reversible and sustained. However, there are various other AKI subtypes used in particular clinical scenarios. Reversible, or transient, AKI is caused by decreased perfusion, or less blood reaching the kidney; involves no actual direct kidney tissue injury; and usually takes hours to resolve after restoration of blood perfusion. On the other hand, sustained AKI is often caused by intra-renal injury; involves actual kidney tissue damage with intrinsic problems with the kidney tubules’ filtration; and can take weeks to resolve. The persistent renin-angiotensin aldosterone system activation and long-term inflammation associated with sustained AKI causes these patients to be at higher risk for chronic kidney disease and other adverse outcomes. In general, reversible and sustained AKI have vastly different treatments and prognoses. Consequently, timely diagnosing and subtyping of AKI can assist clinicians to provide more suitable management and treatment options for severe AKI patients, ameliorating outcomes.
  
  With widely used electronic health records (EHR), large-scale clinical research on AKI can allow vastly improved and consistent recognition of patients who have AKI based on health records stored in hospital databases and is crucial to revealing deeper qualities of kidney disease through careful surveillance in a more efficient way. Existing methods for diagnosing or phenotyping AKI are often study-specific and generally identify all AKI patients as one cohort. However, our phenotyping method applies AKI sub-phenotypes to recognize the complexity of different types of AKI and, in the future, can identify varying degrees of AKI severity using stages. We implemented the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria to phenotype AKI. The KDIGO criteria is widely used in the AKI literature base and relies upon serum creatinine kinetics changes to define Acute Kidney Injury. The Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC) dataset, an ICU-based medical records database from the Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital in Boston, was used for phenotyping AKI. By implementing KDIGO AKI diagnosis and staging criteria with the Structured Query Language (SQL) on MIMIC, we extracted relevant lab values for patients with temporal information and developed an algorithm to identify the presence of AKI automatically. Then, further identifying the presence of reversible or sustained AKI based on how quickly AKI symptoms and abnormal lab measurements receded, we developed a preliminary algorithm for subtyping AKI as sustained or reversible automatically. Finally, we ran checks on the algorithm’s identified AKI patient group to confirm that it met expected measurements. 
  
  Overall, we discovered that approximately 32.4% of all ICU stays recorded in the MIMIC database involved a patient having AKI, but 78.2% of identified AKI were reversible using the developed phenotyping algorithms. Many of these AKI instances were not identified during the actual disease onset, as seen in the lack of an AKI diagnosis in the MIMIC database for 35.1% of patients identified by the phenotyping algorithm, making this implementation more useful for improving the accuracy of clinical AKI diagnoses. The phenotyping algorithm also allows a wider variety of AKI phenotypes to be implemented in kidney disease research on MIMIC. When mapped to different vocabularies, the algorithm’s logic can be generalized and implemented on other clinical databases with a common data model (e.g. OMOP CDM compliant clinical databases).

